[Music]
welcome to topcast the
penultimate beginning of infinity
episode
and last time we covered summarized
a lot of the themes that are in
the end of science by john horgan
and contrasted it with the vision
that we are given of science and
knowledge by david deutsch
in the beginning of infinity and i think
i concluded there with some of my
own favorite reasons why
we should think this is not the end of
science at all
that there are so many really
interesting
unanswered questions right now that we
are on the precipice
we're always on the precipice but on the
precipice of yet
a another bunch of grand fundamental
discoveries
in physics now this idea that we are at
the
very beginning of infinity the beginning
of discovery and science that there are
just so many things we don't know has
been born in upon me
in a really fortunate way because
presently my
job involves almost daily conversations
with
physicists working in very fundamental
areas of theoretical physics
to ask them about what areas of physics
need additional attention just today i
was speaking to a very accomplished
physicist working on the question of
fine tuning
this is a huge open question why is it
that the concepts of nature
and the laws are just such that we get
complex chemistry in our universe
could it have been otherwise well in
speaking to
this person yes indeed it could have
been otherwise and there's a really
interesting set of
possible solutions but really none of
them seem viable at the moment
another route is of course kiara and
david's
constructor theory which might give a
new lens through which we can view this
problem and perhaps
find solutions as well and this is just
within
theoretical physics just theoretical
physics never mind
biology and all the open questions we
have there how could anyone
think we're at nearly the end of science
when something like the
coronavirus has just ravaged the world i
don't know
there will always be more problems
even if even if the fundamental physics
theory could be found beyond the
standard model beyond quantum theory and
we stopped there
i don't think that's the case but grant
that for argument's sake
there would still be scientific problems
to solve
every single physical problem that we
encounter
asteroids from the sky volcanoes from
the earth
viruses from the sea and who knows where
else
are going to require scientists to
address them
so it's not possible to reach the end of
science unless
unless we reach an unproblematic state
which of course as david says
is another word for death otherwise
we're going to continue to be confronted
by problems
ever more interesting problems when we
solve problems we find more interesting
problems arising from the solutions
that's the ongoing infinite part
of science and especially physics i've
been talking to people
at working at the foundations of quantum
theory open questions
people working at the frontier of
quantum computation open questions
people working in various disparate
areas of astronomy from cosmology
open questions the formation of galaxies
open questions the formation of the
solar system
open questions how stars actually work
when they've got high or low metallicity
open questions unanswered questions with
the big bang are really interesting um i
remember going to a talk
with roger penrose who has this
wonderful idea
uh it's it's like a it's a hindu
cosmology almost
that he mathematically figures out that
towards the end of the universe if the
universe keeps on expanding that's the
current best theory seems to suggest the
universe will keep on expanding at an
accelerating rate we're going to talk
about that a little bit more today
that eventually not only do all galaxies
fly apart and the material within the
galaxies fly apart but all matter flies
apart and eventually all you're left
with is a completely and utterly
featureless universe
of photons they're the only things that
then exist in that universe trillions
and trillions and trillions of years
hence
and at that point the universe cannot
keep time in the regular way because to
keep time you need a clock
and in such a universe in the far
distant future there is no such material
out of which the universe can keep a
record of its own
time its own age and so it kind of
forgets in roger penrose's words
exactly how old it is so it may as well
be the beginning of the universe again
and so maybe that's how a big bang comes
about all over again
the end of the universe is a mirror
image of the very beginning of the
universe
and this is kind of this hindu idea of
cyclical universes
anyway that could be mere metaphysical
mathematical musings
but we still don't know what went on
a certain fraction of a second after the
instant in time
at which time and space was created what
was going on what was the
thing that precipitated the origins of
the universe
we don't know this is an open question
this is
probably always going to remain an open
question we'll just keep pushing it back
pushing it back pushing it back a little
bit further in time
perhaps seeing a time before time who
knows
but even then we will still ask what
caused that thing to happen
and again this is just this is just
fundamental
cosmology we have unanswered questions
in every area of science but let's go to
the beginning affinity
where i'm up to the point where david is
talking directly about cosmology
and he writes quote in cosmology there
has been revolutionary progress
even in the few years since the end of
science was written
and also since i wrote the fabric of
reality soon afterwards
at the time all viable cosmological
theories had the expansion of the
universe gradually slowing down
due to gravity ever since the initial
explosion at the big bang and forever in
the future
cosmologists were trying to determine
whether despite slowing down
its expansion rate was sufficient to
make the universe expand
forever like a projectile that has
exceeded escape velocity
or whether it would eventually
re-collapse in a big crunch
those were believed to be the only two
possibilities
i discussed them in the fabric of
reality because they were relevant to
the question
is there a bound on the number of
computational steps that a computer can
execute during the lifetime of the
universe
if there is then physics will also
impose a bound on the amount of
knowledge that can be created
knowledge creation being a form of
computation
just quickly pausing there going back
very last phrase there knowledge
creation being a form of computation
the cena quan on the essential part of
what a human is
without being an essentialist the
essential part of being of what a person
is our explanation for a person is
is a knowledge creator in particular
an explanation creator an explanatory
knowledge creator
that's the best explanation that we've
had this is the answer to the age-old
question
what is a person at least it is a lot of
progress beyond anything that has come
before you know
is a person a creature that's able to
understand morality is a person a
creature that has a soul
is a person a creature that is able to
do mathematics and art these were all
circling the true best
explanation that we now have which is
that people are universal knowledge
creators
and what david says there is just so
important knowledge creation being a
form of computation
i think a few of us have said over the
years the mind
is performing computations get over it
it's not an analogy
that we know now about the universality
of computation
all physical systems out there can be
modeled by a universal computer and that
includes minds
i won't go into it again now but here we
have it again uh
in in in clear black and white knowledge
creation being a form of computation we
can come to understand that better but
those are the facts let's keep on going
quote everyone's first thought was that
unbounded knowledge creation is possible
only in a universe
that does not re-collapse however on
analysis it turned out that the reverse
is true in universes that expand forever
the inhabitants would run out of energy
but the cosmologist frank tipler
discovered that in certain types of
re-collapsing universes
the big crunch singularity is suitable
for performing
the faster and faster trick that we used
in infinity hotel
an infinite sequence of computational
steps could be executed in a finite time
before the singularity
powered by the ever-increasing title
effects of the gravitational collapse
itself
to the inhabitants who would eventually
have to upload their personalities into
computers made of something like pure
tides
the universe would last forever because
they would be thinking faster and faster
without limit
as it collapsed and storing their
memories in ever smaller volumes
so that access times could be reduced
without limit tipler called such
universes omega point universes
at the time the observational evidence
was consistent with the real universe
being of that type
pausing there my reflection i'm sort of
smiling as i read that because
this is one of those areas of
theoretical physics that
um it's fun it's lots of fun but always
in the back of my mind i think
well what we're talking about here is
literally
at least at the time this was written at
least some billions of years hence
and these days we're thinking more like
trillions of years hence when we talk
about the ultimate ends of the universe
whatever that might mean and we don't
know what
knowledge is going to be created
tomorrow or the next day to overturn
theories like this so when we're making
these
grand predictions about such
vastly distant times it
it kind of is like science fiction
because
we just don't know what errors have been
assumed within the theory here
so fun as it is i mean every single one
of these theories
suffers from the same flaw that it
cannot possibly be
refuted by anyone alive today this is
what jaren lanier says
well if not anyone alive today it cannot
possibly be refuted
by anyone doing an experiment within the
next few billion years
okay so all of them can be on the table
i guess they can be refuted by
other observations that we make but this
is the point about making
you know prophecies about the far
distant future
they're just fun they're fun to play
with physically mathematically
i guess yeah as david says in the very
next um
paragraph quote a small part of the
revolution that is currently overtaken
cosmology
is that the omega point models have been
ruled out by observation
evidence including a remarkable series
of studies of supernovae
in distant galaxies has forced
cosmologists
to the unexpected conclusion that the
universe not only will expand forever
but has been expanding at an
accelerating rate something has been
counteracting its gravity
pausing there so this is
one of the ways that we now
talk about a precision cosmology which
is exciting for those of us who
kind of studied this because uh you know
at the very beginning of my
interest in this uh you know cosmology
well we we had an understanding of the
big bang
but that was about it i mean we're
talking about the
grander scales of the universe we're
still somewhat approaching the
metaphysical you know
what would really happen uh to the end
of the universe it was very difficult to
gather the data needed to
be able to constrain the various
competing theories
but now we can now we can and this
particular
event this particular discovery of
the accelerating expansion the universe
is is burned into my own mind anyway
because i
i remember it quite clearly being talked
about
the buzz that the rose
at the university in the the astronomy
department at the university of new
south wales where i was
about 1998 1999 because prior to
everyone sort of had an idea as david
just said of what
should have happened after the big bang
namely the
slowing down of the expansion of the
universe
and and so what happened in 98.99 well
there were two
competing uh groups uh
researchers that were working on
high redshift supernova supernovas that
occurred in galaxies
very very distant from our our own
and why why were they looking for these
things at all well
to constrain these models to figure out
what was going to happen
to the universe in the far distant
future the thing about these
kinds of supernova their supernova 1a
and supernova 1a are these very rare
kind of supernovae
where you have some kind of large star
maybe a red giant
in mutual orbit with a
white dwarf star which is much smaller
and the white dwarf stars have an upper
limit on their mass
once you exceed that upper limit which
is called the chandrasekhar limit
the chandrasaka limit being named after
the physicist who
calculated it i think it's 1.38 times
the mass of the sun
once the white dwarf star exceeds that
number
1.38 times the mass of the sun then the
repulsion forces of the electrons
that are holding the star up so in other
words you've got atoms buttressed up
against
other atoms and the electrons are the
only thing the electron repulsion is the
only thing preventing it from
collapsing still further i suppose the
quantum physicists would pick me up on
that and say well it's a poly exclusive
principle or something like that
but whatever the case you've got one
force outwards trying to prevent the
collapse
and gravity inwards trying to cause the
collapse once you exceed the 1.38
gravity wins and there is a
very sudden collapse of that star
via complicated processes we don't need
to go into
that then results in a massive explosion
basically because the entire star
heats up very very very quickly now this
happens
at precisely that 1.38 times the mass of
the sun it can be
calculated very precisely and so
as one star the white dwarf is accreting
collecting matter
from that other larger star it passes
that limit
and explodes and these things all
explode at the same time now these are
very rare
so within our own galaxy we're not going
to see one
more than likely okay these are so rare
that i'm not even sure that we've ever
seen one within our galaxy i think
even the supernovae that have hitherto
been seen
by the unaided human eye that have
occurred within the milky way
weren't even of this sort so they're
exceedingly rare so how on earth are
these
researchers studying these supernovae
actually able to see any and in fact
they did see quite a number of them
and these days you can see them daily
how is that possible
well rare as they are galaxies are just
so numerous
that even if they only happen on average
uh
once every million years to a galaxy
well there are trillions of galaxies out
there well hundreds of billions that we
can
actually observe and so if you have the
right technology and the right computers
and you're scanning large portions of
the sky then you will pick these things
up and this is what these two competing
groups of astronomers did
one of the groups was the high zed
supernovae
project led by brian schmidt who's an
australian well at least
we can't even as an australian because
he won the nobel prize for this but
actually he was born in america
naturalized to be an australian he led
one group
a very large group of astronomers
actually and they were competing against
the
supernova cosmology project led by saul
perlmutter
and both of them were doing basically
the same thing
making observations of the supernova
competing
in a friendly way because i think
sometimes um uh
when cloud cover obscured the view of
the telescopes for one team
the other team would pick up the slack
for them so they they really did work
well together
and they knew what to expect uh to some
extent
from the results and what they expected
was completely unlike what
the results were and so this was the
this was a
classic experiment of a kind a classic
experiment of a kind
because it's an experiment that
disagrees with
this the known theory the best known
theory and there is no explanation
for what is going on so what was the
what was the problem just in
very in very brief what the problem was
was when they looked at these supernovae
at the distances they were at the red
shifts that they were using redshift
analysis in other words you
you collect the light and then you break
up the light into what it's made out of
and what it's made out of is called it's
spectra
the spectra is a consequence of the kind
of elements that are
in the explosion of the supernova and so
if you burn copper you get this kind of
characteristic bluey-green flame and if
you
you burn iron you get a red flame if you
get a carbon you get this characteristic
yellow flame well the same sort of thing
happens with
stellar spectra and so you collect the
light
with a telescope and then you put it
through this thing called the
spectroscope which then goes into a
computer
and it tells you uh what the star is
made out of that's the first thing and
the second thing is
that you can figure out the red shift
which tells you how far away the star is
the problem is once they did that and
found out how far away the star
was using the stellar spectra the
luminosity the brightness of
these high redshift type 1a supernova
were too dim they were not luminous
enough but the thing is
the understanding of the astrophysics of
the luminosity of type 1a supernova says
that it should be
extremely reliable an extremely good
standard candle something that has a
fixed
luminosity no matter what the distance
is or anything like that now
many of us did question the
results at first because
of things like well the metallicity in
other words how much
metal how much material that is heavier
in the very distant universe would have
been different
because in a very distant universe
you're talking about the universe when
it was much much much younger
and when the universe was much much much
younger it hadn't yet had the time to
produce
stars that contained within them these
same kind of
elements that we find in our local
universe in other words what the
sun is made out of or what the other
stars within the
milky way galaxy is made out of okay
these have higher
amounts of metal why because the stars
have exploded during the explosion they
release
the material that's inside of them which
includes the metals so the next
generation of stars then
uh collects up that material and can
then burn using that material
and when you look at those stars you can
see the material you know contains
metals now
these very very distant type 1a
supernovas are happening with stars that
are that have appeared much much much
earlier
in the universe the light is much much
older which means
it was produced so many billions of
years
earlier so maybe just maybe the physics
of what's going on there
not the physical laws but but what's
happening with the kind of material
out of which those supernovas are
created maybe that's a little bit
different to what
is happening here closer to us now that
could be the case it still could be the
case who knows and that would be called
a
systematic error a thing that we don't
understand about
the astrophysics of stars and in
particular
type 1a supernovas maybe more distant
type 1a supernovas behave differently
to closer supernovas but we can rule
that out now
because there's a lot of other evidence
also pointing out an accelerating
expansion of the universe
not least of which is the cosmic
microwave background radiation analysis
as well
which clever astrophysics can figure out
looking at the anisotropies and how
large those anisotropies are
and so on to explain those in terms of
an accelerating
expansion of the universe as well so
it's not only a type 1a
supernova data that we're relying on
right now and as
um saul perlmutter himself says in an
article that he
he wrote those high redshift
supernova are fainter than we would
expect
even if the universe was completely
empty so
the the mathematical models uh uh
are strongly in agreement with the idea
the hypothesis
that the universe is accelerating in its
expansion
for reasons that we have next to no clue
about
and as david says let's go back to the
book uh he writes quote
something has been counteracting its
gravity the gravity of the universe
we do not know what pending the
discovery of a good explanation
the unknown cause has been named dark
energy
there are several proposals for what it
might be including effects that merely
give the appearance
of acceleration but the best working
hypothesis
at present is that in the equations for
gravity
there is an additional term of a form
first muted by einstein in 1915
and then dropped because he realized
that his explanation for it was bad
it was proposed again in the 1980s as a
possible effect of quantum field theory
but again
there is no theory of the physical
meaning of such a term that is good
enough to predict
for instance its magnitude the problem
of the nature and effects of dark energy
is no minor detail nor does anything
about it suggest a perpetually
unfathomable
mystery so much for cosmology being a
fundamentally completed science
depending on what dark energy turns out
to be it may well be possible to harness
it in the distant future
to provide energy for knowledge creation
to continue forever
because this energy would have to be
collected over ever greater distances
the computation would have to become
ever slower in a mirror image of what
would happen in omega point cosmologies
the inhabitants of the universe would
notice no slowdown because again they
would be instantiated as computer
programs
whose total number of steps would be
unbounded thus dark energy which has
ruled out one scenario for the unlimited
growth of knowledge
would provide the literal driving force
of another
the new cosmological models describe
universes that are infinite in their
spatial dimensions
because the big bang happened a finite
time ago and because of the finiteness
of the speed of light
we shall only ever see a finite portion
of infinite space but that portion will
continue to grow forever
thus eventually ever more unlikely
phenomena will come into view
when the total volume that we can see is
a million times larger than it is now
we shall see things that have a
probability of one in a million of
existing in space as we see it today
everything physically possible will
eventually be revealed
watches that come into existence
spontaneously asteroids that happen to
be good likenesses of william haley
everything according to the prevailing
theory
all those things exist today but many
times
too far away for light to have reached
us from them
yet pausing their my reflection so this
is
um on the assumption that everything
that physically possibly can happen
indeed will happen which is one way of
understanding for example the
multiverse could be one way of
understanding
the universe like ours it just this
assumes of course this argument that
david has just
made there about what just popping into
existence and and good likenesses
william paley
assumes the cosmological principle the
cosmological principle being
on very large scales the universe is
homogeneous and isotropic homogenous
being you know it's it's it's the same
at every single point it looks the same
at every single point
uh and and this is an assumption i don't
know that it's something we can derive
from more fundamental
theories of physics i think we just
assume it
logically needs to be the case and so
then this would follow
constructor theory of course may have
some new light to shed upon things like
this
and the idea that anything that can
happen
indeed will happen now everything might
just by chance that's one thing but then
some things might need to be made to
happen even though
they're possible we might need a
constructor for it and for more on that
you'll have to go to
my series on the physics of canon cart
and before that by the book the physics
of canon cart by kiara maletto
but for now let's go back to the
cosmology here david writes
light becomes fainter as it spreads out
there are fewer photons per unit area
that means that ever larger telescopes
are needed to detect
a given object at ever larger distances
so there may be a limit to how distant
and therefore how unlikely
a phenomenon we shall ever be able to
see
except that is for one type of
phenomenon a beginning of infinity
specifically any civilization that is
colonizing the universe in an unbounded
way
will eventually reach our location hence
a single infinite space
could play the role of the infinitely
many universes postulated
by anthropic explanations of the fine
tuning coincidences
in some ways it could play that role
better if the probability
that such a civilization could form is
not zero
there must be infinitely many such
civilizations in space
and they will eventually encounter each
other if they could estimate that
probability from theory
they could test the anthropic
explanation furthermore
anthropic arguments could not only
dispense with all those parallel
universes
they could dispense with the variant
laws of physics too
just pausing that david does have a note
here that when he says those parallel
universes he's talking about
universes with different physical laws
this is not the quantum
multiverse completely different
completely different
um remember the
the multiverse in the quantum theory
explanation is a multiverse where all
the universes are obeying
exactly the same laws namely the laws of
quantum theory
but there's this kind of megaverse idea
used in anthropic arguments where
we have the concept of universes with
different physical laws and as i say i
was speaking to a researcher today
who does simulations of this kind of
thing
and and has has very interesting ideas
about
for example a fiddling with the knobs of
the
constants of nature so for example the
gravitational constant g
you know the fine structure constant uh
the cosmological constant these things
you can fiddle with the values of these
things
and then see what happens to the
universe and
most fiddling of the constants
result in featureless universes
some he was saying don't cause the
extinguishing of
of life very easily but but
some do cosmological constant
gravitational constant for example
uh have huge effects on either formation
of galaxies or
formation of stars now the interesting
thing then
which i wasn't aware of because i know
these simulations done simulating
entire universes universes with
different laws in a sense namely the
values of the constants are different
but keeping everything else the same
what the researchers
cannot yet do which i asked about
can you simulate universes
with entirely different laws of physics
in the sense that well let's not have
general relativity let's have something
completely different
let's not have quantum theory let's have
something completely different
this is not possible at the moment
it's not feasible at all he was saying
well if you wanted to change the law of
gravity
then you would need to redo stellar
physics stellar nucleosynthesis for
example
using that new theory so that's a whole
other thing that the
simulation would need to be able to cope
with so they're not even there the best
they can do now
clearly this is really just merely
scratching the surface
of trying to figure out could life exist
in universes with different physical
laws
all they're doing is fiddling with the
constants of nature and keeping
everything else
exactly the same in other words the laws
of physics have exactly the same form
it's just the coupling constants are
different
and so they're getting interesting
results out of that
the interesting result is almost all
choices
other than the selection of constants
that we do have
result in a sterile universe that's an
interesting enough result but it's
certainly not
putting paid to this idea that if there
is a megaverse out there there could be
infinite civilizations out there
there could be i don't believe this i
don't think anyone should believe this
no one knows this
it's just completely
conjectural right now we have no way of
constraining any of these theories
really we don't have an answer to
the fine-tuning problem this is why
we're very much at the beginning of
infinity as far as
this question is concerned okay so i'm
skipping a bit that david writes
here you'll have to go to the book
yourself to read that bit
and i'll i'll skip to where he talks
about the fermi problem
so he's just finished uh describing some
aspects
of the issue with with fine-tuning and
with purported solutions to fine-tuning
and namely the anthropic argument
and of the anthropic argument he says
quote nor therefore
can it solve the fermi problem where are
they it may turn out to be a necessary
part of the explanation but it can never
explain anything by itself
also as i have explained in chapter
eight any theory involving an enthropic
argument
must provide a measure for defining
probabilities
in an infinite set of things it is
unknown how to do that in the spatially
infinite universe
that cosmologists currently believe
we're in that issue
has a wider scope for example there is
the so-called
quantum suicide argument in regard to
the multiverse suspect
suppose you want to win the lottery you
buy a ticket and set up a machine that
will automatically kill you in your
sleep if you lose
then in all the histories in which you
do wake up you are a winner
if you do not have loved ones to mourn
you or other reasons to prefer that most
histories not be affected by your
premature death
you have arranged to get something for
nothing with what proponents of this
argument call
subjective certainty however that way of
applying probabilities does not follow
directly from quantum theory as the
usual one does
it requires an additional assumption
namely that when making decisions
one should ignore the histories in which
the decision maker is absent
this is closely related to anthropic
arguments again
the theory of probability for such cases
is not well understood but my guess is
the assumption is false
pausing there my reflection yes so this
quantum
suicide idea that that if you commit
suicide you should expect as a matter of
probability
within the multiverse that you'll wake
up tomorrow
my way of understanding this this is
no a version of you will wake up but
that's not you
we've talked about this before and i did
recently an episode called the nexus
which is where i think
that the strand of the fabric of reality
everything that's in the beginning of
infinity really
brought together really uh
uh our best to provide the best
explanation for what a person is and
that's why i called the nexus this this
mixing of the threads of the fabric of
reality um give us a better
understanding of what a person is
and in that i was trying to understand
the nature of personhood in the context
of the multiverse
knowing that we consist of
infinitely many fungible instances right
now so sitting here right now
continuing to speak to you
are many fungible instances of myself
and right now
some portion of them some measure of
them
have gone off to get a cup of tea
and do a variety of other things as well
but there remains a set of fungible
instances right here
now i'm not conscious of those other
versions right there are other versions
of me that have gone
now if i um arrange to have myself
killed in my sleep how does
consciousness deal with that
are you extinguishing a particular
consciousness forever and for good
and allowing the another one to wake up
there's no guarantee that it's you and
this is why david says
you can't ignore the histories in which
the decision maker is absent
okay so something has been killed we
know
as a matter of fact that people die in
our universe all the time we can see
them
dying now some versions of them then go
on to exist
right but we're not observing those why
should you think that you're going to be
the observer
of the version that survives there is no
good argument for this is why i think
that
something will survive something will
survive possibly
given our best understanding of quantum
theory now um but
i'm not betting my life on it
at all i think the quantum immortality
thing quantum suicide thing
uh it it doesn't run through and i think
we've all all it says is that we've got
a lot that we don't understand here
that's all this is the
another flag like dark energy for a
problem
it's not a solution to anything there's
not an explanation there
um and so given that you know we
shouldn't
we shouldn't go trying to play the
lottery in this way okay let's go back
to the book because we're about to talk
about
uh one of my favorite philosophers
david writes a related assumption occurs
in the so-called simulation argument
whose most
cogent proponent is the philosopher nick
bostrom
its premise is that in the distant
future the whole universe as we know it
is going to be simulated in computers
perhaps for scientific or historical
research many times perhaps
infinitely many times therefore
virtually all instances of
us are in those simulations and not in
the original world
and therefore we are almost certainly
living in a simulation
so the argument goes but is it really
valid to equate
most instances with near certainty like
that
for an inkling of why it might not be
consider a thought experiment
imagine that physicists discover that
space is actually many layered like
puff pastry the number of layers varies
from place to place the layers split in
some places
and their contents split with them every
layer has identical contents though
hence although we do not feel it
instances of us split and merge as we
move around
suppose that in london space has a
million layers while in oxford it only
has one
i travel frequently between the two
cities and one day i wake up from having
forgotten
which one i am in it is dark should i
bet i am much more likely to be in
london
just because a million times as many
instances of me ever wake up in london
as in oxford
i think not in that situation it is
clear that counting the number of
instances of oneself is no guide to the
probability
one ought to use in decision making we
should be counting histories
not instances in quantum theory the laws
of physics tell us how to count
histories by measure
in the case of multiple simulations i
know no good argument for any way of
counting them
it is an open question but i do not see
why repeating the same simulation
of me a million times should in any
sense make it more likely that i am a
simulation rather than the original
what if one computer uses a million
times as many electrons as another
to represent each bit of information in
its memory am i more likely to be
in the former computer than in the
latter a different issue
raised by the simulation argument is
this will the universe as we know it
really be simulated often in the future
would that not be
immoral the world as it exists today
contains an enormous amount of suffering
and whoever ran such a simulation would
be responsible for recreating it
or would they are two identical
instances of equality
the same thing as one if so then
creating the simulation would not be
immoral
no more than reading a book about past
suffering as a moral but in that case
how different do two simulations of
people have to be before they count as
two people for moral purposes again
again i know of no good answer to these
questions i suspect that they will be
answered only
by the explanatory theory from which ai
will also
follow pause there my reflection on that
yes so david has mentioned this before
all the way back in
i think it's in a window on infinity in
the earlier chapter
the problem we're trying to count
infinities
and then if you have these universes
with different
physical laws you have an uncountable
infinity
and if you're thinking of this fractal
type situation
where in the distant future there's
going to be civilizations that will have
computers
in which there'll be simulations of
people who
have computers in which there are going
to be simulations and so on and so on
and so on just
frankly expanding out there's no way of
counting these and so
we don't even know what the nature of
consciousness is either and by the way
our best understanding of physical
reality that we occupy right now as
we've already said
is that you are infinitely many fungible
instances already
which can't be counted and so in what
sense
are those more numerous than you what if
like
david's giving a hint here if the
simulated versions of you
are not infinitely many fungible
instances but are based upon
some other kind of simulation of the
laws of physics which nevertheless allow
for conscious experience
well we've done experiments here to show
that we live in a universe
that is governed by the laws of quantum
syria
which mean that you as a person aren't a
single instance
but maybe those simulated the the most
efficient way
the most efficient way of simulating
people in those computers
is single instance people maybe that's
it
don't know don't know um but we know
that we're not
single instance people we're uncountably
infinitely many so maybe we already
outnumber
even that number of infinitely many
people being stimulated i wonder why
well
he wouldn't have known nick bostrom
didn't take into account this idea of
the
the multiverse already that we live in a
multiverse because not many people take
the multiverse
seriously enough and philosophers should
analytic philosophers should okay
skipping a little and let's go to
a little bit more about bostrom and
david writes here
an even more dubious example of
anthropic type reasoning
is the doomsday argument it attempts to
estimate the life expectancy of our
species by assuming
that the typical human is roughly
halfway through the sequence of all
humans
hence we should expect the total number
who will ever live to be about twice the
number who have lived so far
of course this is prophecy and for that
reason alone cannot possibly be a valid
argument but let me briefly pursue it
in its own terms first it does not apply
at all if the total number of humans is
going to be infinite
for in that case every human whoever
lives will live unusually early in the
sequence
so if anything it suggests that we are
at the beginning of infinity
also how long is a human lifetime
illness and old age are going to be
cured soon
certainly within the next few lifetimes
and technology will also be able to
prevent deaths through homicide or
accidents by creating backups of the
states of brains
which could be uploaded into new blank
brains in identical bodies if a person
should die
once that technology exists people will
consider it considerably more foolish
not to make frequent backups of
themselves than they do today in regard
to their computers
if nothing else evolution alone will
ensure that because those who do not
back themselves up will gradually die
out
so there could be only one outcome
effective immortality for the whole
human population with the present
generation being one of the last that
will have
short lives that being so if our species
will nevertheless have a finite lifetime
then knowing the total number of humans
who will ever live provides no upper
bound
on that lifetime because it cannot tell
us how long the potentially immortal
humans of the future
will live before the prophesied
catastrophe strikes
in 1993 the mathematician verna vinji
wrote an influential essay entitled
the coming technological singularity in
which he estimated that within about 30
years
predicting the future of technology
would become impossible
an event that is now known simply as the
singularity vinji associated the
approaching singularity with the
achievement of ai
and subsequent discussions centered on
that i certainly hope
that ai by which david means agi
is achieved by then but i see no sign
yet of the theoretical progress that
i've argued must come
first on the other hand i see no reason
to single out ai
as a mould-breaking technology we
already have billions of humans
most advocates of the singularity
believe that soon after the agi
breakthrough superhuman minds will be
constructed
and that then as vinji put it the human
era will be over
but my discussion of the universality of
human minds
rules out that possibility since humans
are already universal explainers and
constructors
they can already transcend their
parochial origins so there can be no
such thing as a superhuman mind as such
there can only be further automation
allowing the existing kind of human
thinking to be carried out faster
and with more working memory and
delegating perspiration phases
to non-ai automata a great deal of this
has already happened with computers and
other machinery
as well as with the general increase in
wealth which has multiplied the number
of humans who are able to spend their
time thinking
this can indeed be expected to continue
for instance there will be ever more
efficient human computer interfaces
no doubt culminating in add-ons for the
brain but
tasks like internet searching will never
be carried out by superfast ais scanning
billions of documents creatively for
meaning
because they will not want to perform
such tasks any more than humans do
normal artificial scientists
mathematicians and philosophers ever
wield concepts or arguments
that humans are inherently incapable of
understanding universality implies that
in every important sense
humans and allies will never be other
than equal
similarly the singularity is often
assumed to be a moment of unprecedented
upheaval and danger
as the rate of innovation becomes too
rapid for humans to cope with
but this is a parochial misconception
during the first few centuries of the
enlightenment there has been a constant
feeling that rapid and accelerating
innovation is getting out of hand
but our capacity to cope with and enjoy
changes in our technology lifestyle and
ethical norms and so on
has been increasing too with the
weakening and extinction of some of the
anti-rational memes that used to
sabotage it
in future when the rate of innovation
will also increase due to the sheer
increasing clock rate
and throughput of brain add-ons and ai
computers then our capacity to cope with
that will increase
at the same rate or faster if everyone
was suddenly to think a million times as
fast
no one would feel hurried as a result
hence i think the concept of the
singularity as a sort of discontinuity
is a mistake knowledge will continue to
grow exponentially or even faster
and that is astounding enough pausing
there
ending the reading there for today
because it's a wonderfully positive part
to end on this singularity by the way uh
if you want
some more eviscerating critique of it
i think that's as strong as you can get
anywhere but but a slightly different
approach to it
the computer scientist geron lenier
j a r o n l a n
i e r he is far too
unknown okay he's known amongst a
certain community of people
but he deserves to be like david deutsch
far more well-known than what he is and
the
geron lanier has a an additional
kind of handicap in that he doesn't like
social media and so he refused to go on
social media but you can find his
wonderful
talks that he gives on youtube and his
books are absolutely brilliant
and he uh similarly doesn't agree with
the
bostroms and the ray kurzweil's and the
verna vinjis of the world
on this point about doomsday and the
singularity and we're gonna
you know upload ourselves to the
internet and all this sort of stuff
he he admits of the mystery of human
consciousness for example in a slightly
different way
to david be interesting to hear them
have a conversation but here this this
whole idea the singularity you know that
there's going to be this this sudden
take off of of
of technology well haven't we already
had that and like david says that the
the psychological impact of this is
well apart from the doomsayers the
naysayers the pessimists that have
always been with us you know they
complained about you know the the
invention of the motor vehicle or the
the television or the telephone the book
okay there's that great uh twitter
account uh pessimists archive
where they reproduce very old newspaper
articles of people complaining about
things like
books and how books are ruining children
ruining their lives and then of course
that moved on to radio is ruining
children's lives and
television is ruining children's lives
and of course today it's um not just
computers but
but any piece of technology is ruining
children's lives so
we've always had the pessimists trying
to tell us that technology is bad for us
but we can't handle it and and there is
this zeitgeist now that
people aren't handling the technology
particularly well but
you know with every solution comes new
problems would you rather be out in the
field scratching the existence out of
the dirt
as you know neanderthal people used to
do
of course not okay we have some problems
with technology today
but they're a heck of a lot better than
the the dealing with the problems that
they solved
also mentioned there is you can't have
ai being super intelligent and taking
over all of our tasks especially not the
creative ones
because they'll be people uh super
intelligent
uh narrow ai you know ai that's
super intelligent in the sense that it
can beat us at chess never wants to
choose to do anything other than chess
and so it's not a threat to us
for more on this see my um articles at
bretthall.org about super intelligence
where i critique nick bostrom's view of
super intelligence his book super
intelligence
uh i think it's um
i i i was disappointed in it
uh more than the fact i didn't like it
like i i i sense i
kind of liked it because it read like a
science fiction book and i listen to the
audio
and whoever reads the audio they sound a
bit like a robot so it's a little bit
scary but
but they're in that uncanny valley where
they're quite they're human
but just a little bit like nick bostrom
to some extent
that's very cruel no um i think boshroom
is obviously extremely intelligent
but but the book for me was
disappointing because i was expecting
to be blown away by the uh precision of
the philosophy but in fact it was the
philosophy in the epistemology
that was the weakest part of the book
and it was upon this
foundation that rested all the pessimism
so once you get the epistemology wrong
the pessimism just flows naturally from
these
ridiculous ideas about how bayesianism
this is what really turned me off
bayesianism i think it was
so i have to credit nick bostrom for
inspiring me to really research the
depths of bayesianism
and realizing the poverty of the
epistemology at the heart of what
bayesianism is all about
and so if you just take on papa's
conception of epistemology you don't get
these
pessimistic ideas about ai and doomsday
and so on and so forth
it's no accident that the pessimists
are profits with bad epistemology it's a
an awful trinity of of misconceptions
that go together there to
all um self-support one another uh
just just take on the right epistemology
and you'll no longer be
tempted to make prophecies okay you'll
admit of your ignorance
on the one hand and then realize that
there's hope for the future in being
able to solve
any problem using creativity
okay next time will be sadly to some
extent the final
episode on the beginning of infinity
i'll probably do that from
somewhere else a slightly nicer
different location i think
i'll have to think of ways in which i
can make the final episode
something different something great okay
but until then bye-bye
[Music]